Svetlana Tikhanovskaya, the main opposition candidate in Sunday’s disputed elections in Belarus, has left the country as it reeled from a second night of unprecedented protest action.

Tikhanovskaya is in Lithuania and is safe, Lithuania’s foreign minister Linas Linkevicius tweeted on Tuesday morning.

Her team had been unable to reach her by phone on Monday after she had filed a complaint against the official results at the election commission building in the capital, Minsk. According to the commission she took just 10.09% of the vote, while longtime ruler Alexander Lukashenko won 80.08%.

At least one person was killed and dozens injured in a second night of clashes between riot police and protesters across the country.

Police use truncheons against protesters during a second night of demonstrations in Minsk on Monday.
Police use truncheons against protesters during a second night of demonstrations in Minsk on Monday. Photograph: Sergei Grits/AP
The fighting late on Monday appeared to escalate as police once again employed rubber bullets and stun grenades against demonstrators, while some shot back with fireworks and several Molotov cocktails, according to a Guardian reporter who estimated the crowd at several thousand people.

Advertisement

Protesters also began constructing crude barricades from shopping carts, fencing, breezeblocks and other items found on the street.

Some said they had decided to join the protests after scenes of harrowing violence on Sunday evening, when police attacked demonstrators with rubber bullets, water cannon, stun grenades and batons.

“I never went to protests before and until yesterday and I told everyone I know not to go either,” said a young protester in a hoodie wearing a medical mask. “But when I saw how they beat people across the street from my house, I realised I couldn’t sit at home any longer.”

On Monday Tikhanovskaya had issued a message of defiance, rejecting the results of the election, which she described as massively rigged.

Her aides said the opposition wanted a vote recount at polling stations where there were reports of vote tampering. They also said the opposition wanted to hold talks with authorities about how to bring about a peaceful change of power.

Lukashenko, who is facing the deepest crisis of his 26 years in power, has threatened to crush any illegal rallies. He claimed that the protests were being directed from abroad, singling out Poland, Britain and the Czech Republic.

Tikhanovskaya stopped short of joining street protests and her team released a statement on Monday evening saying they feared her appearance could lead to “provocations”.

The protests have largely been decentralised, with no clear leader, although popular bloggers on social media have played an important role in their coordination. Protesters organising over Telegram channels discussed bringing protective gear such as goggles and first-aid kits as they expected fresh clashes with riot police armed with batons, rubber bullets, water cannon and stun grenades.


Svetlana Tikhanovskaya: from 'Chernobyl child' in Ireland to political limelight
Read more
Tikhanovskaya was initially a stand-in candidate for her husband, a popular YouTuber jailed earlier in the year. But she grew into an effective campaigner, attracting more than 63,000 people to a rally last month in Minsk, and thousands more in small cities and towns usually dominated by Lukashenko.

Preliminary results released on Sunday showing a landslide victory for Lukashenko had prompted unprecedented protests in cities across the country, posing the greatest threat to the man often referred to as Europe’s last dictator since he came to power. Foreign observers have not declared a Belarusian election free and fair since 1995.

He was already facing unprecedented anger over his handling of the economy and a bungled coronavirus response.